Debbie Langford: drink them your network and and also building company target lists utilizing various search filters and and that sort of thing so let's get started.
Debbie Langford: and get right into it um and you know i'm sure many of you feel pretty comfortable with linkedin, but I want to share a few pointers that will maybe bring things up a notch for you and.
Debbie Langford: increase your visibility is it's important for a couple of reasons, and you probably want to become known as a thought leader or someone with a certain expertise or um.
Debbie Langford: there's there's this part of repositioning yourself in the job marketplace because of a desired career change promotion added adding skills and certifications and, of course.
Debbie Langford: A degree, so what increases visibility on linkedin I have brought up five points and I want to talk about them in a little bit of depth, so that you can get a better understanding of it all star profile status is something that linkedin uses when you utilize.
Debbie Langford: A good portion of their template and there's also really it's really important to make sure that you're using the industry or occupational keywords that that would help someone find you.
Debbie Langford: And it's very important to build a strong large network and connecting with executive recruiters can be a way to increase your visibility, because they.
Debbie Langford: will look to their network first oftentimes before they start looking elsewhere and active engagement on the network is also really important as well, so let's kind of go over all of these and.
Debbie Langford: I don't know if you've seen this statistic, but all star profile status actually provides 40 times more likely for you to receive an opportunity.
Debbie Langford: And the, the main reason why this is 50% of linkedin users.
Debbie Langford: have complete profiles, which means you can really.
Debbie Langford: be above your competition with having that all star status, so what equals all star status, there are some minimum requirements here and.
Debbie Langford: there's eight of them that I am thinking, would probably be helpful for you to to see and know about um first of all your profile photo that's.
Debbie Langford: really important, because you receive seven times you're more seven times more likely to be clicked on than others, if you have a profile photo.
Debbie Langford: i'm your industry and location, that is a required field but, but those of you that might be interested in relocation.
Debbie Langford: You want to use five zeros as your zip code that that equals United States and sometimes that's a nice way to show up in more search results with with people that are looking for you.
Debbie Langford: On the about section is an important part that I were you'll want to make sure to add your email.
Debbie Langford: and possibly your phone number, if you feel comfortable with that and so that people can connect to you, even though that they are not first degree connected on a current position with your description is.
Debbie Langford: really helpful if you use bullet points in your accomplishments and there is no formatting in linkedin and so you, you can put your bullet points up on a word Doc and then.
Debbie Langford: copy and paste them into the template to make it a little bit easier and readable to us and you also need to have to pass positions and that can come into play, if you worked at one company.
Debbie Langford: For for several years, but you have different job positions you can list out each of those job positions and the end that will fulfill that requirement.
Debbie Langford: And there are also skills, you need to have at least five of them, but I recommend, I recommend that you get as many as you can, especially with the.
Debbie Langford: Maximum that you have here and linkedin is has a recruiter premium subscription for recruiters that they can search by skill.
Debbie Langford: With just in that section so it's really important to to optimize that your education um you know not you probably won't.
Debbie Langford: want to put the year that you initially graduated maybe with your graduate degree, if it was more than 10 to 15 years, of course.
Debbie Langford: This degree will be something because it's so recent that you would want to include for sure, and then the minimum requirement of having 51st degree connections is also part of that all star status.
Debbie Langford: But um I would challenge you to come to a 500 or more connections that takes a while to build up and it's not going to happen overnight, of course.
Debbie Langford: But the more connections, you have the more powerful your search results will be, and you can really discover different leads and contacts and target companies that way with with more powerful search results.
Debbie Langford: So there is a section we call hit a headline and the headline it appears just below your name on your profile.
Debbie Langford: and on a thumbnail when it comes up in your search results and you want to customize this rather than having default of what your job title is in the company that you.
Debbie Langford: Currently work for, and so my recommendation is to have your targeted title and or just a description of the job that you are currently.
Debbie Langford: possess that you currently possess and.
Debbie Langford: then add different key skills different key words, how you create value and how you impact um sometimes adjectives can be misleading with seo, in fact, if you use something like driven sales manager, you might actually somebody might you might come up in a uber driver.
Debbie Langford: Type type of search so say you want you want to be careful with those adjectives So what are some examples of some targeted headlines, and this is, you know different and.
Debbie Langford: The targeted title at the beginning and then has some specialties and different things that that are included in that regional Vice President role.
Debbie Langford: And so that's something that that you can kind of see here's another one.
Debbie Langford: And again, the targeted title, but it actually has a what I would call a personal branding statement create robust and efficient technology solutions to support internal and external business needs um there's also something here, where you can see different.
Debbie Langford: In there some industry and some.
Debbie Langford: kind of specialties within operations in this one that give a little bit better idea of what types of operations this person is responsible for and then this last one is.
Debbie Langford: Just a different way, an Asterix was used rather than that pipeline just kind of a different way to to present yourself so that's who you are and what you do and that that's.
Debbie Langford: An important visibility factor, but we also want to make sure you stand out amongst your competitors, and so the about section is a way for you to introduce yourself.
Debbie Langford: And those the top three lines and that section, are what is visible unless somebody clicks on that see more, and so I I like to call this way to really.
Debbie Langford: capture, what is your superpower well What do I mean by that well, you have a professional part of you that that is the skills in the career that you have established, along with your achievements and accomplishments but there's also a personal you that has your personality, you might.
Debbie Langford: Be have a lot of humor that you use in your daily life, of course, people have missions and in certain passions and if you combine those two together that's really what you call.
Debbie Langford: super you or your superpower, what do you do better than anyone else, and when you are introducing yourself in this section, the about section.
Debbie Langford: I recommend using first person language and any of you are choosing I mean my and almost like you're talking across the table from someone.
Debbie Langford: And if you're changing careers it's really important that you link your past with what you are wanting to do in the future because, unlike the resume.
Debbie Langford: The about section can be future focused rather than all in the past, and especially with those those of you here on this this.
Debbie Langford: Call because you are improving yourself, you want to make sure that that you get that i'm really connecting the dots but also sharing what you're planning to do and what your future goals are.
Debbie Langford: So i'm I think that some examples here might help you a little bit because a superpower is is not just talking about yourself in ordinary terms it's actually really trying to grab someone's intention.
Debbie Langford: And this was somebody i've worked with, and you can see he's he's a Chief Scientific, Technical advisor but he used three words to describe describe himself, and those are ones that that can.
Debbie Langford: kind of stick with with a person and grab someone's attention.
Debbie Langford: I, like this one, every day, I create narratives out of numbers tell visual stories with data and make presentations so executives can make the best fiscal decisions for their company, so what this is this is like the first or.
Debbie Langford: first sentence of your about section, so that you can make sure that a person clicks on seymour.
Debbie Langford: And my former boss called me his Swiss army knife that's because I deliver multifunctional expertise within the HR scope.
Debbie Langford: I love that because i'm probably going to remember that person as a Swiss army knife um and that's kind of a unique way to describe themselves i'm.
Debbie Langford: An accounting professional that I worked with said i'm a finisher, which is to say i'm the person who gets the job done right he sees obstacles as opportunities and who always exceeds expectations so i'm.
Debbie Langford: showing what sort of value in contribution is is kind of this is a different approach, you might see.
Debbie Langford: I tell compelling stories for companies causes and brands I utilize every megaphone and tool in my bag to amplify brands, that would be a marketing person.
Debbie Langford: And then, this last one is a sales professional I love selling one of my earliest and most meaningful life accomplishments was being the top girl scout seller cookie seller.
Debbie Langford: In my trip, when I was nine years old, that success set a career path for me at an early age, so you can kind of see these earn are describing.
Debbie Langford: A person in a unique attention grabbing way in, so I would challenge you today to come up with something like that for yourself and sometimes it takes talking to different people to to help you with that because.
Debbie Langford: You need to know what you're recognized and known for in your reputation.
Debbie Langford: So as i'm talking about increasing your visibility and one of the things that I mentioned was you need to incorporate incorporate industry keywords.
Debbie Langford: Now, if you think about when you're trying to search for a particular type of person on linkedin and, of course, this would be for a recruiter or a hiring manager they're going to put in.
Debbie Langford: A certain job title there they may put in a acronym for a certification or a particular skill, because they're looking for somebody who has that.
Debbie Langford: So these are nouns or phrases of nouns and those are the types of search terms that you want to have in your linkedin profile of course you are going to be using verbs to make sentences.
Debbie Langford: But resume keywords are really focused more on verbs rather than actual job titles or skills and certifications those are included, of course, but but i'm trying to kind of distinguish the difference between the resume and linkedin.
Debbie Langford: Now, where, can you find these these keywords i'm you probably know, some of them already because you've been working in a particular profession.
Debbie Langford: But, but there is a lots of things that that you can go to to kind of come up with as many as possible, and you know you can create a word cloud with with.
Debbie Langford: Job postings and my next slide I will show you how you can do that, and there are some applicant tracking system simulators that's what I.
Debbie Langford: it's an applicant tracking system at us, as what that acronym stands for, and those are what companies use to scan resumes initially.
Debbie Langford: To see if they match a particular job description, and if that company wants to continue to talk to that person.
Debbie Langford: And there's also keyword and occupation sites and we cannot forget the most important thing, which is networking with with other contacts and leaders.
Debbie Langford: You can look at their profiles a setup information meetings and you would want to take notes on the key words that they use.
Debbie Langford: When you talk to industry experts that's one of the best ways to fine tune the keywords and so that is something that that you would want to really focus on as well.
Debbie Langford: So some of these resources that I mentioned, I just wanted to provide a few resources in some job sites and with those job postings that I was mentioning and if you.
Debbie Langford: haven't ever created a word cloud, and you can copy about eight to 10 job postings that are a similar position and some similar level into a word document.
Debbie Langford: You don't kind of delete the headings and education responsibilities different things of that nature, the things that are just descriptive of only that company.
Debbie Langford: You want the text of the job description, and when you put that into a word document that all of those eight to 10 jobs than can be put into a word cloud website and create something that will help you with what are the words that are most commonly used and and that can be really helpful.
Debbie Langford: Those ATMs the applicant tracking system simulators that I mentioned the one that's most popular is called job scan.co and this actually helps you to populate into on on the website.
Debbie Langford: If you populate your resume text, and then the job description text, you can see how well your resume matches with the keywords that are listed in the job description, so it can give you some some clues that way.
Debbie Langford: there's also some different occupation listen at these two websites because.
Debbie Langford: When you're moving into a different industry or you're moving into a different profession, sometimes you need a little bit more information and i'm sure you're learning that.
Debbie Langford: In your classes at a&m, of course, but, but this is also just another type of resource that you can find these keywords at.
Debbie Langford: So another thing that's helpful to have when you're trying to increase your visibility is not not only having a large network, but a strong one as well.
Debbie Langford: And I put this picture up here, because you will you'll notice that i'm your first degree connections obviously helps to increase your second level connections exponentially and that's really where the power is.
Debbie Langford: And so it's a visual way of understanding how the connections work on linkedin and my recommendation, as I, as I mentioned before, is to aim for 500 connections and you want it to be.
Debbie Langford: Industry and occupation centric and what i'd like to do is there is a way that you can analyze what your network looks like right now so i'm going to go ahead and.
Debbie Langford: switch over.
Debbie Langford: To linked in.
Debbie Langford: And do a little bit of an analysis here, and I am going to.
Debbie Langford: go into my advanced search filters.
Debbie Langford: And the advanced search filters are easily populated when you click into this this search window and hit the enter key that's how I got these up and i'm going to be analyzing the people in my network let's let's do a few things like i'm i'm.
Debbie Langford: going to go to let's see if i'm going to go into some data analytics do I have a lot of people who are for first degree connections in in those those in that field so first of all I would look at first degree.
Debbie Langford: and
Debbie Langford: The industry that i'm thinking about is thinking about going into healthcare.
Debbie Langford: Maybe information technology i'll just pick those two industries, and then I can come down here to the bottom, and I can put in data.
Debbie Langford: analytics.
Debbie Langford: And so um i've got some work to do.
Debbie Langford: that's now i've used data analytics that's not the only title that I can use I could put.
Debbie Langford: You know data analysis, you can put different words in here to kind of come up with that, but um you know if I wanted to see how strong my second degree connections were.
Debbie Langford: Well i've got 640 that fall in this category, so this is an opportunity for me to to maybe i'm kind of look at this and find out where do they live, do they live in my area, well, I could put in.
Debbie Langford: Greater Houston.
Debbie Langford: And it will narrow down to 45 of these are people that are that I know somebody who they know and and so that that is a way for me to get.
Debbie Langford: A conversation started and obviously I want to leverage those mutual connections to send the request for advice to ask for an introduction and I could even.
Debbie Langford: look to see who is a hiring manager in here I mean this this person is a leader.
Debbie Langford: can look here's a director so so that's that's one way for me to be able to do some analysis of my my connections and I might want to do some work in that area if i'm moving into a new field or.
Debbie Langford: or industry or that's that sort of thing another thing that can be helpful on linkedin is for you to actually download a copy of your contacts from linkedin and I am going to click on whoops that's not where I wanted to go and go to settings and privacy.
Debbie Langford: And you'll see this is how linkedin uses your data i'm going to choose the second one, which is get a copy of your data.
Debbie Langford: And what I want to do is I want my connection, so I want something in particular, and when I click on this and I can request an archive now, it takes about 10 minutes, but if you've got a large network, sometimes it takes a little bit longer than that and it comes in an excel.
Debbie Langford: csv form in you can sort by name by job title by company, and you can do some analysis there and even use this as as a way to do some networking.
Debbie Langford: So um This is something that that not a lot of people tap into, and I feel like it can be really powerful and so I wanted to make sure that that you, you saw that I have a slide that has some some instructions on that.
Debbie Langford: so that you can recreate that when when you have a little bit more time and, but you can sort the the excel sheet tower, you need to add some columns that will help you in your networking.
Debbie Langford: All right, another thing that helps with your visibility is connections with executive or craters.
Debbie Langford: And you know recruiters really don't like to see desperation, but they do like to see professionalism and if you are a first degree connection.
Debbie Langford: Then you're easier to see for those executive recruiters you can follow target companies because recruiters do that as well, and they will look to see is this person following.
Debbie Langford: My company and that's that's one way of showing some interest but there's also linkedin groups that are by industry or by topic or by occupation, I know there are some data analytic and groups available and.
Debbie Langford: recruiters and hiring managers that are looking for people in that with those skills are going to join linkedin groups that were those those people hang out and and communicate with each other.
Debbie Langford: And of course you can always ask for referrals from your network there's nothing better than somebody telling you what their their experience was with a recruiter and that that can be.
Debbie Langford: helpful and then your linkedin profile if you can make sure that it is clean and tight and shows an executive presence shows a professional presence.
Debbie Langford: Then that recruiter is not going to have to work with you a lot to make sure that you look okay when their client reviews.
Debbie Langford: Your your skills and your qualifications and then your profile really needs to possess a sense of who you are and that's not a complete history as much as it can be maybe a 10,000 a look.
Debbie Langford: From 10,000 feet as to what you're doing and that's a little bit broader approach, but you can make it a little bit and.
Debbie Langford: i'll use that same analogy a 3000 foot perspective, and you, you kind of want to keep that perspective throughout the whole profile, so that you can make sure to have a good, clear message of who you are.
Debbie Langford: So it's always good to refer others that you know if you're approached by a recruiter and possibly that role or that company.
Debbie Langford: Or that location is not a good fit, but if you refer somebody to them or an executive recruiter is going to remember you and I put a website up here on where you can learn about the top 50 recruiters in the US in case you wanted to kind of check that out.
Debbie Langford: So um, the last thing that that increases visibility is your engagement and how active, you are on linkedin and linkedin rewards.
Debbie Langford: completeness and I showed that within the all star status it rewards connections with that large strong network that we've talked about and and also.
Debbie Langford: rewards and engagement or activity and you will be higher in the search results, not on page 10 but on page two or one.
Debbie Langford: and have a recruiter or hiring manager So what are some ways that you can be active and engaged in your network well sharing status updates on.
Debbie Langford: Using hashtags in your updates are always good hashtags are something that linkedin and has uses, just like Twitter for for different search terms.
Debbie Langford: And if you have an expertise in an area writing an article or making it something like a mini blog for yourself is is a way to establish some thought leadership and.
Debbie Langford: You can do a personal post, you can tag people in your comments you can also use those advanced search features that that I showed you a little bit about along with engaging in group discussions that the linkedin groups that you're a part of.
Debbie Langford: So when it comes to activities and there's really three primary reasons why you would want to engage with your network increase your search engine optimization.
Debbie Langford: be higher in those search results, as I mentioned before you want to showcase your thought leadership and demonstrate your expertise.
Debbie Langford: And i'm you know activity includes a lot of different things um you know how much time should you take, I think, maybe you should share at least once a week and.
Debbie Langford: spend about five or 10 minutes a day reading your newsfeed and and doing some you know commenting or liking and sharing.
Debbie Langford: And you can set up notifications to get people's birthday and work anniversaries and congratulate them and stay engaged with your network that way.
Debbie Langford: And as we've talked about those linkedin groups are important and another way to do and be engaged with your network is to.
Debbie Langford: write a recommendation or even endorse them for certain skills on their profile and doesn't take very long the endorsements and then it's, something that would be valuable and.
Debbie Langford: Of course post or share and articles that you read that you think would would be most helpful um.
Debbie Langford: These hashtags when you post are really helpful and for searching for things and and i've got some an example later on in my slides here.
Debbie Langford: But these are some of the hashtags that you might want to look at and to just just see what is out there and what posts come up and it will save you quite a bit of time you won't have to search and search and search and and it'll really count on the laser focus in what you want.
Debbie Langford: um so we've talked about increasing your visibility that takes some time.
Debbie Langford: And, but now I want to share of five different ways that you can actually measure your visibility, so if you work on all of these these different areas and.
Debbie Langford: Obviously you have an opportunity to see who's viewed your profile you don't know why they viewed your profile, but if you have a premium subscription you can see, the last 90 days so that's always helpful and.
Debbie Langford: If there are people that are commenting on your posts and then then that increases your visibility I normally receive about 200 to 300 views per post.
Debbie Langford: Increased over time and because there were a number of people that actually shared this post with their network, I actually had 788 views on this particular one, which means I got a lot more visibility, because of that.
Debbie Langford: um you can also get you know the your visibility would mean that you are getting emails or in males from or craters industry experts hiring managers subject matter experts, you know that sort of thing and.
Debbie Langford: You also can work on getting referrals from your network, and that is one way to measure your visibility and then there was this really cool feature that linkedin has it's called the social selling index, and if you go to this particular.
Debbie Langford: website address that I have on this slide linkedin will.
Debbie Langford: Make sure to.
Debbie Langford: Show you where your profile stands compared to the rest of your industry, as well as how you stack up against your.
Debbie Langford: The rest of your network, and this is this is mine um and there's four different components that are measured and it's just kind of interesting to see.
Debbie Langford: You might want to do this before you start working on increasing your visibility, so that you have kind of a baseline and then look at it after you've been working on it on linkedin for a while and see how it's increased that might be something that would be really interesting to compare.
Debbie Langford: So i'd like to go over some some lesser known research tips, and I see that I have just a few minutes left, I think I can get through all of these if you have any questions, though.
Debbie Langford: i'm hoping that I have a couple of minutes to be able to answer any of your questions, and so you can put them in the chat if you have any from from some of the the material that we've talked about so far, while I finish these these last few slides up, so there is some.
Debbie Langford: You know, several research tips that I think using those advanced search filters and expanding your network with an alumni search and not not everybody knows how to do this.
Debbie Langford: And you can actually search your connections connections and I love the fact that you can build a target list on linkedin.
Debbie Langford: And the hashtags, of course, can help you find specific content as I, as I mentioned earlier, so let's talk about the advanced search filters on the aisle and in the alumni.
Debbie Langford: search and I put I pulled that Texas a&m i'm on linkedin and there's 320 6710 alumni that that show that they have have gone to Texas a&m.
Debbie Langford: And, and if I wanted to find people in Houston that went to Texas a&m in the last five years, you can see that that I.
Debbie Langford: Put in Houston and then I put a start year and an end year and to find people now let me, let me just make a mention here that i'm.
Debbie Langford: Many people that have come into the workforce that have over 15 years of experience they might not have.
Debbie Langford: Their graduation date on here but they're going to be included in this alumni search, even though they don't have a graduation date so just keep that in mind.
Debbie Langford: um, and so this is going to identify, you can see, there is a search criteria, where they work, and I can find out.
Debbie Langford: Of these 21,000 alumni I can find out where they work in tech in Houston and this might be a great way for me to do some research on those companies if I haven't heard of them.
Debbie Langford: I can look for people that have common connections and start conversations that way, and I also can be.
Debbie Langford: More active with my college and by giving back and offering to make a presentation or donation i'm sure some of you have already done that so um.
Debbie Langford: there's another feature, and this is in yellow on this slide there's any you can search for virtual events on linkedin.
Debbie Langford: And that might be helpful because i'm many of them are free and sometimes their offer with membership or you can pay to register for a particular conference or seminar, but when I use continuous improvement in the.
Debbie Langford: search bar here you'll see that 149 results came up on different events, and I can even see how many people are attending, so this is a little bit newer feature and it's it'll probably be further developed in the future on linkedin.
Debbie Langford: And researching your connections of connections, I put kind of the steps here when you use the people advanced search filter.
Debbie Langford: And you are going to select that first degree, just like I did before, but I can actually type in a person's name, to see if they might have.
Debbie Langford: A connection at a particular company, and I can even go one step further, as in this second diagram and screenshot that where I want to see who does marvin know.
Debbie Langford: That works in IBM, and then I can reach out to him to ask for an introduction, so that can help with.
Debbie Langford: You know, finding networking opportunities now building the target list of companies, if you.
Debbie Langford: select the company's option of the advanced search filters, you can filter by location and industry and even company size and you will find a number of.
Debbie Langford: Companies then that you can do some research on, especially if you're looking to to move elsewhere or utilize your skills and move on.
Debbie Langford: And then and hashtags, as I mentioned, is it's a really great way to discover different topics and groups what people are talking about, and it can save some time by customizing your newsfeed.
Debbie Langford: On linkedin when you post or comment you can use hashtags you can even tag people or.
Debbie Langford: Companies in your comments by using at in the person's name and and that can can be a great way to do that, and you can.
Debbie Langford: Follow hashtags and this operations management one and there's almost 4 million people following that hashtag and and not all hashtags are that popular.
Debbie Langford: But where you see the hashtag is in the posting and it's usually at the bottom of a person's posting you probably seen this before, in the end that's how those come up.
Debbie Langford: i'm so Lastly, I just want to leave you with this that.
Debbie Langford: You might have some questions as you're working on linkedin and on some of the functionalities that we've talked about or or different.
Debbie Langford: different things that you're not so sure of, and of course I would love to be of help, and I would love to connect with you on linkedin but.
Debbie Langford: You can also do use the help feature here and I just wanted to make sure that you were aware of that um so In closing I.
Debbie Langford: hope that this has been a useful presentation just kind of in a different way, rather than talking about profiles and son, I wanted to come from a different angle.
Debbie Langford: Because I think visibility is is something that we could all use on a free platform, so please reach out to me and connect with me on linkedin I would be happy to do that just let me know that you attended this session or how we met.
Debbie Langford: And if you have any career questions, I would be happy to assist you as well, so I will turn um I don't know a hobby or do we have.
Debbie Langford: Some some time for questions or I think I had until 6:45am I correct.
Aldape, Javier A: we're over debbie so okay yeah I guess people can reach out to you.
Aldape, Javier A: yeah yeah we have questions or follow.
Debbie Langford: Okay okay very good.
Aldape, Javier A: Thank you for being a part of this class debbie We appreciate you, so much so i'll give you a virtual clap.
Aldape, Javier A: have a wonderful evening and thank.
Swanson J, Charles: You.
Swanson J, Charles: Thank you, thank you.
Debbie Langford: you're very welcome, and thank you for for allowing me this opportunity, have a great evening.
Karen Fireman: Thank you very much.
Debbie Langford: you're welcome.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'll give you all five minutes for a break, if you need and then we'll start.
MS Analytics Class 2021: into the new material.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and apologize for this, because.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I don't have a way to run the version of SAS that you have when you.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Open SAS studio talked about the different versions of SAS or so using SAS or 14.3 and not to brag, but I just installed.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the reason that makes a difference is because, when I saw the McDonalds problem which we saw in the last breakout exercise has an alternate optimal solution, I get a different one than the one that you get when you solve it so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: At any rate, let me show you a graph of one of the limits for the McDonalds diet problem and costs, so you can think of this as being.
MS Analytics Class 2021: An illustration of what dual values measure so i've got calories on the bottom so there's a constraint.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That says that the calories have to be at least 2000 that's the default value which you can see, indicated by a blue line here and the cost so cost of our diet was $5 and 36 cents something like that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And you can see that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: at that particular value it's flat the graph is flat, so the dual value the slope of that would be zero as we increase it, you can see that the dual value changes and each of these little linear segments represents.
MS Analytics Class 2021: An area in which the solution behaves in a particular way, and then, as you increase the demand for calories other model elements come into play and change that so you can think of the fact that this is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In this case, is to be convex as something like diminishing returns.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so what i'm going to concentrate on here is the fact, at any rate, when we looked at the table of dual values and you looked at the dual values of the constraints and, in this case the reduce costs for the decision variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The condition that indicated that that could be an alternate optimal solution was satisfied, so it makes sense to try and explore the set of optimal solutions.
MS Analytics Class 2021: When I solved it on in the version of SAS or that i'm using my solution had 2000 calories in the optimal solution and I believe in years it has 2017 calories.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we might want to kind of explore the range of calories that could be in an optimal solution so based on this graph here your solution is that that first kind of break point.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let me go into SAS.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Hopefully i've got SAS to do working here one of the last things that we didn't in the previous class was we use the set of operator to define food types.
MS Analytics Class 2021: One of the advantages of doing that was when we used the data set to populate food types, they were repeat values, there were a lot of entrees there are a lot of sides, and so we got warnings in the log file it's kind of irritating we do it this way it's cleaner.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, at any rate.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Having done that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And just running the McDonalds problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and looking at the results.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can see from the table that there is a constraint.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's not hard to pick it out here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is carbohydrates, has to be between 350 and 375 it's a range constraint it's at 375 and the dual value is zero that would indicate that the possibility of an alternate optimal solution, possibly with fewer carbohydrates okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now we could then explore that I talked.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So that there was a construct involving the suffix parameter array for our objective that we could use to enforce.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A solution being optimal and I get us that kind of in a teaser slide for the control flow, let me go ahead and open demonstration program, so this is going to be in less than three.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it's called mcdonald's calories.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And, as I indicated on that teaser slide this is set up to automatically go through the constraints and the decision variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and determine if there could be an alternate optimal solution, and so this flag here is going to be tripped so that we will, after solving the problem, solve it again with a new objective and the objective i'm using is called calories because for me.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I was trying to make calories big because my solution had 2000 calories i'm going to change that for you to minimize the objective calories so that I can find the optimal solution that has the fewest calories right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It would make sense to have some kind of a secondary objective in mind.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The one doesn't always present itself, you could, for example, to explore the set of optimal solutions minimize and maximize the decision variables over the set of optimal solutions.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is a similar idea, so the constraint that guarantees that the all the solutions that come afterwards or optimal is total cost is that most total cost so well.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So total costs are so well from the previous self statement is the optimal objective value, which is the $5 and 36 cents, so it is as if we actually had that number here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But we don't have to know it we don't have to look it up in a table and copy it and paste it here because it's stored in this in this parameter.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this constraint ensures that all subsequent solutions have the smallest total cost, therefore, they would be optimal.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then, subject to that i'm going to try and minimize the number of calories.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so this will automatically check to see if there's an alternate optimal solution or the conditions that allow for an alternate optimal solution are satisfied.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then, since the flag will be tripped it'll solve with our new objective and i'll print The total cost to show you that it is in fact an optimal solution and then we'll just print, the solution, so you can see what it looks like.
Karis Jochen: Okay, so me is the question.
Karis Jochen: Yes, so you keep saying that there something that suggests that there may be a an alternative or optimal solution and I just want to clarify is that when the jewel value equals zero then there may be another optimal solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Yes, so when when when a dual value for a tight constraint zero because the dual values for the other constraints are going to be zero automatically if a constraint is not tight it's dual value is going to be zero.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But if there's a time constraint that has a zero dual value and tight means it's up against it's bound right, as we know from the this week's homework assignment.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Or, if I have a decision variable that is at its upper lower bound, with a dual value of zero.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because again, if I have a decision variable that's between its bounds we've seen that it's dual value is always going to be zero so it's when there's one that we expect to be positive or negative, that is zero that indicates the possibility of an alternate optimal solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so without having something highlighted ideally here i'm going to run this one mcdonald's calories.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And this will actually solve two.
MS Analytics Class 2021: problems, we can see that, from the table of contents, so we have a problem summary two problems summaries to solution summaries, because the condition was satisfied so we've already seen the solution to the first one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's look at the second one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right so here's the solution summary for the second self statement.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it finds a solution with a total cost of which is the same $5 and 36 cents, it was trying to minimize the number of calories and it found a solution that had 2000 calories right as opposed to your old solution which had 2017.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it's going to have a slightly different solution, I think the difference between them is the number of honey packs this one has 15.76 and the other one had.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If I can check real quick the other one had 16.168 so it's not tremendously different, but since honey is free it doesn't change the objective.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But it can increase the number of calories and also the carbohydrates and that's what pushed carbohydrates, so one solution has the calories constraint that's tight exactly 2000 yeah this solution bumps up against a different constraint, which is the carbohydrates, is to 75.
Okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Just to remind you kind of the shape of those graphs when we have.
MS Analytics Class 2021: When we look at the meaning of dual values and to actually demonstrate that that technique with.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Finding alternate optimal solutions will make it to other types of models like mixed integer linear programming and nonlinear programming models.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We may not be able to tell if there's an alternate optimal solution in the same way, but this way works for linear programming models.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Let me just touch on a little bit of review before we go on.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so we talked about control flow.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In addition to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Talking about dual dual values, so one of the things that you may remember is that we can't have nested declaration statements and the mysterious magic eight is remember the magic eight ball.
MS Analytics Class 2021: which sometimes answers your question with asked me later, so this indicates that the compiler people don't like the fact that they can't tell necessarily that the type of something is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: a string or a number, so you can't miss declaration statements that's the takeaway here we looked at.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Four statements so it's like a loop So you see four is the keyword and then you have a set that you're looping over in this case i'm doing something for each P and products, it could be a single statement like an assignment statement it also could be a do block of statements right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We also have if then l statements i'm not sure that we looked at a specific example of this, this is pretty kind of generic programming structure here might be an application of that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's say you kind of you develop a model and you're solving it for different data sets it may be that most of the time.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The the model is feasible and has an optimal solution and everything goes well, you created SAS data set the minions implemented and and everyone is making.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Money but it couldn't be that for some data sets the problem might not be feasible might be infeasible proc up model allows you to kind of build in logic in your program that says if solutions status now solution status is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: a string valued parameter that's internally defined in pocket model and its values are.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The the solution status from the solution summary table so it's optimal or in feasible or other alternatives so you can say if it's optimal meaning if the problem had an optimal solution, then we do this else.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That would probably mean that the problem is infeasible then we go to plan B, so that it doesn't just kind of crash and not produce a SAS data set and the minions are sitting on their hands Okay, so it allows us to use kind of conditional logic.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And if you wanted to see more about solution status, you could look that up in the math programming user's guide guide talked about that last time, a document a PDF document or an online document that you can Google and find.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We talked about some set operations classic that our operations like Union intersection here's an example of how we would use the Union.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if origins and destinations are sets and, of course, they would have to have the same type say sets of strings, then we could look at their Union that might populate another set that we've declared.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We saw that some of the set operations, could be used as aggregation operators Union intersection.
MS Analytics Class 2021: There are other aggregation operators we've seen the some looked at an example with men.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But things like logical and and or and product, those are also defined aggregation operators, and then we looked at some specialized set operators that are useful and optimization.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I showed you examples of slice and set of with simple networks as the sets that we were applying them to after the break today we're going to learn more about networks.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Other set operations there's card, which is the cardinality of a set cross, which forms the Cross product of two sets to form a multi dimensional set so there are many operators that are defined in pocket model that are useful.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So hopefully you've gotten, to the point when we started out, we have kind of a fairly primitive idea of what we are able to do in pocket model, this is an example where we would build and solve a simple optimization model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A more nuanced view might allow us to do something like the following this would be parametric Lee solving a model so again, we declare the model you read information in do some pre processing.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Then we might loop over some values of a local dummy parameter.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's say if we were considering the furniture making problem and we wanted to do an analysis of how the net profit varied as a function of the budget limit.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, the dual value gives us a little local information, but we could loop over a set of values for that limit and solve the problem for each one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Possibly storing them in a parameter array and then do some post processing create SAS data sets and then maybe a graph right so it's there's a little bit more nuanced there.
MS Analytics Class 2021: in the sense that we're we're doing some programming some very basic programming and we also have.
MS Analytics Class 2021: programs that have multiple solved statements there's no limit to the number of self statements economic a single prakash model program so I showed you want to this one could have as many solved statement says there are members of the index set.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what i'm going to do is i'm going to take some of the control flow statements that we learned and I remind you that I told you, I was teaching you just enough to make you dangerous.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And some built in what if analysis type functions that are available in pocket model to do what I would call model updates, so we have kind of like a basic model, and we want to say.
MS Analytics Class 2021: What happens if I modify it in this way or that way can we did a little bit of that we saw that the dual values can make some predictions here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And in your exercises you did some simple changes to some of the parameters in your model, but there are other there's other functionality that i'd like to show you.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then, as I said in after the break we'll talk about network models.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the first type of model modification that i'm going to describe is something that you don't really ask prakash model to do it's not specifically trying to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: show you how your model would behave differently if you change things, but it's modifying it to try and simplify it to make it solve faster and that's something that we refer to as in this case the LP pre solver.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And if you've ever opened up a log file for a protocol model program if you solve a model, you will have seen some information there about the pre solver we could look at that, for the say the McDonalds problem is a simple example.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then we'll talk about some changes that we might want to make to your model and some of these you did in the exercises.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But we are going to look at some new ways of modifying models that i've described here and we're going to kind of.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Look at them all in the context of the McDonalds diet problem so we'll make various changes to that model and re optimize it and see what happens.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the pre solvers, the first thing and again it's not a modification that we're asking for the protocol model attempts to take your linear programming model and.
MS Analytics Class 2021: remove some of the decision variables and constraints to solve an equivalent smaller model then after solving that it transforms it back to a solution to the original model, so you don't really see any difference, it just might operate more efficiently.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it has a variety of different techniques that it used, some of which are pretty straightforward, so you could enter a constraint as.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A constraint that has only one term that you could have introduced as bound on decision variable an example would be in the RSPB.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Product mix problem we have these demand con constraints well they're just upper bounds on the decision variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So instead of declaring them as constraints, we could have introduced them as bounds on the decision variables and that turns out to be more efficient.
MS Analytics Class 2021: As far as the computing is concerned, because the number of constraints in your model determine the size of the system of equations that solved in every iteration so bigger system of.
MS Analytics Class 2021: equations takes longer to solve each iteration takes longer.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The bounds on the decision variables basically are just kind of an accounting or been counting operations, they don't change the size.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the pre solver allows you to use them or declare them as constraints it automatically converts them to bounce on the decision variables, and so it operates more efficiently.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Some constraints might be slow so clearly redundant, that they can be eliminated and there's an example of that in the McDonalds diet problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We have calories from fat that has negative infinity for a lower bound and plus infinity for an upper bound, so that that's removed from the model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If we have a variable his values fixed meaning its upper bound and lower bound or the same.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Like when you set the upper bounds on the demand con constraints to zero that essentially fixed all the variables at zero so those can be eliminated from the model so in various ways, it can solve a simpler smaller model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now you might say, well i'm such a great modeler I would never have a model that the pre solver could clean up well in many cases the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The simplifications our data dependent, you might have a model that's perfectly good and doesn't allow any simplifications for most data, but if you get some really sparse data.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And the pre solver might be able to simplify the model allow it to solve a smaller model but convert it to a.
MS Analytics Class 2021: solution to the full model and, as I said, I can illustrate this simply by the McDonalds problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Let me just go back and assess studio and i'll just look at that kind of basic version, the one that's not doing anything fancy let's just check the log file.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And so, in the beginning of the log file.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It kind of describes the size of the problem, the basically the information from the problem summary table how many variables, how many constraints, etc.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then, it talks about the pre solver so it says the model P solver is disabled for linear problems, so the art modern pre solver is designed to simplify any optimization model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But there are solver specific pre solvers for LP for Mr LP and for certain types of nonlinear models that are better they take advantage of the structure of these models and so it's using the LP pre solver.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It was not able to do much with this model, so it said it removes zero variables and zero constraints.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If it had been able to eliminate variables and constraints, this is the part of the log file, where you would have seen that indication.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It doesn't tell you which ones are eliminated just tells you how many because it's kind of like secret sauce.
MS Analytics Class 2021: SAS is got some techniques for the pre solver that it doesn't think anybody else knows about, but basically everybody knows about everything, so they ought to tell you, but it's the secret sauce here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now you have some control over the The pre solver.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You don't have to use it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: there's a solver option called pre solver so recall to that when we're solving an LP model if we want to use solver options we say solve with LP slash and then we can list all the options we want, so I can say pre solver equals none that will disable The pre solver.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now why would you want to do that, so the pre solver is very quick, you can see that, from the timing it'll tell you how much time is spent on the pre solver and how much time is spent in the solver.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And remember, we can also use the print level equals to to get even more detailed information about timing that's another solver option.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The default option is somewhere between moderate and aggressive so he could crank it up too aggressive if we really thought that that would be that would pay off for us.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So when would you actually change the pre solver options well we'll look at one situation, a little bit later where it makes sense to turn it off.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But if you're solving a lot of very similar models, with different data sets you might do a little experiment, to see how successful the pre solver is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And if you found that it was never able to simplify your model, then you might as well turn it off and save a little bit of time.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Or if it was successful you might want to crank it up too aggressive, to see if that would even make it solved more efficiently.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But if you're just solving one or two models it doesn't make sense to monkey with the pre solver doesn't take very much time and you see probably not going to say much time.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let's look at some more intentional types of model modifications So the first thing to review is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If we're going to consider changing things in the model when we're allowed to change them so let's think about changing the values of parameters okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: When can we modify those in a pocket model program and your homework assignment probably gave you some insight into this, you may have had assignment statements to give new values to parameters a different parts of your pocket model Program.
MS Analytics Class 2021: or their situation situations where you can't.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Change the value of parameters, this is taking us back several several classes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it's probably not going to be so fresh in your mind.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so i'll remind you that it has to do with how you initialized then when you declare them, so if you initialize the value of a parameter using an equal sign, then it can't be modified in the Program.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If you initialize it with an it then it has that same value to start with, but you can modify that value in the Program.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now, the more typical case when we're reading data from SAS data sets and and using macro variables to populate individual parameters is that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Reading values in from a SAS data set to populate them.
MS Analytics Class 2021: doesn't affect our ability to change them it's only when we specifically initialized them to using equals to a particular value or an expression that we can't modify them.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And you will see a little love note from the compiler in the SAS log that says the target is not modifiable and then you'll be able to go back and change the initialization.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so what are some.
MS Analytics Class 2021: possible ways that we might want to vary the values of parameters so i'm going to look at an example in the context of the McDonalds diet problem, and this is somewhat similar to the homework problem where you changed the cost of grains and hops, so what i'm doing in this case is and.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I particularly kind of like to always assume that i'm going to be solving a base model and then making some modifications and then solving that so that I can compare them.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this is setting the upper bounds of all the decision variables to to this could be a quick and dirty way to get rid of 1600 packs because it would limit the number of condiments of all kinds, to to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If I knew a priori that this was the only one model, I wanted to solve, then I would just change the declaration statement from greater or equal to 02 grand equal to zero less than or equal to two.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But if I want to compare what happens without this set of upper bounds, and with them, then I declare them to be non negative I solve it, then I would introduce this for statement and then solve it again and I can compare the two solutions, one with a bounce and one without okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And whenever we change things, using an assignment statement we just have to make sure that it's already declared at that point.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then we have to kind of pay attention, where it is relative to the solve statements, because it all goes top to bottom, so if you solve and then make a change it won't count towards that first model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So some of the things that you did mainly involve changing parameters.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can also change, as in this case upper lower bounds, these are parameters that are associated, these are suffix parameter arrays.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And we could have changed this over a subset of foods we could have in the McDonalds problem, we could say, I want to have an upper bound have to just on the on trace as long as we're able to describe the set of indices, that we want to make the change for.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this is more relevant to what you did you assign different values to parameters.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Another change that it might be able to do if you wanted to change things and kind of a wholesale way is you could use read data statements.
MS Analytics Class 2021: to reassign values of parameters, or you can also use read data statements to read upper and lower bounds okay so there's a variety of ways that we could change.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The values of upper and lower bounds of parameters.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And i'll look at the specific change here when we get to the next demonstration with the McDonalds problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But I also want to consider a few other different types of changes in that DEMO.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So one of the things that's convenient to be able to do is to consider the effect of dropping a constraint from the model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so that means basically it's not enforced, so the speed limit is 55 but if they're not paying any attention to you it's not enforced.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, so the constraint is still there, but if you drop it it's not enforced this the solver is allowed to exceed whatever limit there is for sodium here, so if the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If the nominal limit is like 3000, and I say drop, then you can have you know 8000 milligrams of sodium and I kill you but you could still eat it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It to answer the question how much does the cost of the daily diet decrease if there's no limit the drop doesn't magically make the change and solve the model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It just removes the constraint, so if you want to see the effect, then you have to have a solid statement, so you might have a solve drop diet sodium and then solve again to see what the impact of that is on your model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: there's a way to get it back so if you drop a constraint, maybe you want to consider the effect of dropping each constraint, in turn, you can drop it and then restore it to bring it back to life it's now enforced.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and restore has a nice property that restore is Catholic in the sense that you can restore things that haven't been dropped.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if you said, for example, drop diet sodium and then you said, restore diet, meaning restore all the diet constraints you don't have to remember, which ones you dropped, and so we can kind of use drop and restore creatively.
MS Analytics Class 2021: For example, in this set of two statements, the first command drops all of the diet constraints and then restore brings just the limit on calories and protein back into the model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: As opposed to say drop and then list the nine that you actually want to drop okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright sure.
MS Analytics Class 2021: you'd want these statements yeah potentially yeah I mean that's kind of what if analysis type tool and it may be that in some cases.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You maybe look at the dual values and then you let those guide you which constraints, you want to investigate dropping so you might not drop each one of them, in turn, because many of them if they're not tied it really doesn't matter right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so that's another useful tool we illustrate a couple of those.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'm going to go back in SAS to do.
MS Analytics Class 2021: there's two kind of similar sounding programs that that might be potentially one we're looking for.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So there's a mcdonald's react and a mcdonald's update i'm going to open up the update one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so the the preamble and the model itself hasn't changed and using the new way to populate food types.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, since i'm looking at a couple of different models i'm going to use titles, to help distinguish them and the output.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the first one is just going to be your basic model so i'll call it the McDonalds daily diet model i'll solve it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm not going to print the fancy table, but i'll just print the foods that are in the diet and the total number of each type of foods and to condense it a little bit further.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If we're not ordering any drinks, then that won't be in the second table if we're not ordering any sides it's just the ones that are positive, in both cases.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So then i'll put an upper bound have to on all the foods he's in the forest amen I call it the McDonalds daily diet model with a PR bands solve it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: print, the solution, then i'm going to consider the effect of dropping the sodium restriction now, this will still have the upper bounds right because I haven't undone that change.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is this is maybe a good good thought question here, how would you undo this setting of the upper bounds to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: there's not like an undue like unformed.
Swanson J, Charles: Would you said it equal to live long live long.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I would set it up set up equal to do.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, so I would set it equal to plus infinity which is constant big.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Which is a little bit tricky but that's what it was originally so when something doesn't have an upper bound and effect will be has an upper bound plus infinity.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So that would be the end for that, but when considering these to be cumulative changes so i'm going to take the model with upper bounds and drop the sodium restriction.
MS Analytics Class 2021: OK so i'll print, the solution and just to show you that the constraint is still kind of hanging around but not enforced i'm going to print the body of the constraint.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now that the body body of the constraint also has another name in the in the model it's called intake of sodium, but it could be calculated as the body, and this will illustrate that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's still doing those calculations and when I want to get rid of the titles I just use an empty title statements i'm a new that after the quick statement.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So run it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, so you can see from the results in the table of contents that i'm solving a number of different models right 123 models so The first one is going to be the basic one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can see where the titles come into play there, so our initial solution $5 and 36 cents, so you seen this solution, a couple of times right, this was all the honey packets.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So when we put an upper bound to on here that's going to eliminate some of these values we can't have more than two orders of cheerios cheeseburgers honey or sweet and sour sauce so it's going to make.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The cost of the diet go up likely right because we have fewer choices so let's look so there's our kind of summary, we add in the upper bounds.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It costs more $6 and 82 cents.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, the solution is going to potentially look a little different, you can see i'm kind of maxing out on the sauces there i've got now Barbecue sauce honey and sweet and sour sauce.
MS Analytics Class 2021: there's our kind of summary of the diet now, when we drop the sodium restriction.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But keep the upper bounds of two.
MS Analytics Class 2021: What will likely happen is the cost will go down from this cost so it'll be less than $6 and 82 cents, but whether or not it overtakes our original value of $5 and 36 cents is not clear, because they're kind of tighten it in one way loosened in another let's look at that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, so the objective value goes down to $5 and 20 cents.
MS Analytics Class 2021: who knew the mcdonald's has a lot of inexpensive foods that have lots of sodium in them, I guess you all need that so now, you can see that there are a lot of things that i'm ordering to have because again that's the most I can get.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And and getting a lot of sodium almost seven seven grams of sodium So you can see that much sodium in your hand.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so those are some different changes that we can make me look at a couple more.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So those the one that is kind of represents a tool that you can use was the drop drop and then restore which undoes the drop all right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm gonna look at another one here that allows me to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: make decisions for the solver that may not be the optimal decisions so here's here's the facts about a big MAC.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And you can imagine, thinking of this in terms of our US rba that we're not going to be able to have a lot of big MACs in our diet right for a couple of different reasons, relative to the bounds that we have.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But I tend to really like the big MACs, especially when they're like you know, on sale or two for one or something like that I can't resist so let's say I want to tell pocket model that I want to look at the best diet that has a big MAC.
MS Analytics Class 2021: What i'm gonna do is i'm going to tell it to fix.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The decision variable to this value so i'm going to fix number by a big MAC to one, so the in even if it's not the best choice, this will force it's ham.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it'll have to try and make the best choices for all of the other decision variables to support this decision that i've made a priori OK.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So again, if I just say fix it doesn't do it if I say fix it kind of changes the model, but in order to find this the cost, I have to fix it and solve.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And if you look at the syntax of fix it's a little bit tricky in the sense that Okay, so we can fix and we can have a list of variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Possibly equal the different values, but the strange part about this is the values are in italicized brackets and from the other syntax boxes that we've seen that means that's optional.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what would it mean to say fix number by a big MAC and not specify what to fix it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, it fixes it to its current value and in our model, since we haven't solved it that that current value in the zero the default value for decision variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It could be that we've solved a related model and that model determine values for our decision variables and then we want to say fix it to whatever the values are and the optimal solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right without knowing it without needing to specify it I can just say a fixed number by a big map they'll fix it to that value.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it's it's undoable in the same way that drop is and the way to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: undo a fixed is called unfixed and unfixed is also Catholic in this in the way that restores so you can unfixed something that hasn't been fixed right which is nice.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now for for in both of these cases, you might be tempted to say okay I fixed a lot of different variables in different arrays a decision variable so i'm just going to say unfixed semi colon.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, if you just say unfixed semi colon does nothing you have to tell it unfixed something if you really want unfixed everything you could say i'm fixed.
MS Analytics Class 2021: underscore underscore that's proper models way of referring to all of the decision variables, we saw that when we looked at the furniture dual problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Likewise, you could say restore underscore con underscore but it's if we wanted to fix some things in an array we can unfixed the whole array doesn't have to be fixed to be on fixed.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so that's i'm getting hungry just thinking about that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Another change that we might make, and this is the one example that's a tool.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But is to add some additional constraints to make this model more reasonable.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now, in general, these constraints could be like if we're solving a product mix probably might be adding a budget constraints, but in this specific case we've seen some shortcomings of the model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, instead of just putting kind of a hard cap on the number of sauces.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We really wanted to tie the sauces to the things that we can order that give us the ability to ask for sauces and in this, in this case i'm going to zero in on here the MIC nuggets right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So that the way the system works is that if you get a six piece make nuggets you can get any to sauces whatever kind, you want free for a nine piece and six for 20 piece, if you were to draw a graph of those it would be almost a straight line think there's mcmath.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We want to make sure that if we order salad dressings and toppings that we actually have salads order.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We might want to try and enforce having a certain number of drinks right, although you could say that we might want to have water, because they usually will eat water for free.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then we want to address this, the calories from fat So when I talked about the US already requirements and I showed you the data set.
MS Analytics Class 2021: calories from fat had a missing lower bound in the missing upper bound, because the restriction on calories from fat is that no more than 30% of our calories should be from fat.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we should be able to enforce that it's just going to be a little trickier than our other ones that just founded the intake above and below.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right in this next demonstration i'm gonna do something a little different so before I solve modifies solve modify solve.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If you were to look at the at the time it takes to solve those models basically about the same.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we're not taking advantage of the fact that we've already solved kind of a base model and made a slight modification to it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Somehow we ought to be able to use the information from the existing solution as a head start to getting the solution to the modified model and i'll do that in the next demonstration.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And so the idea is to really optimize kind of easing our old solution as a warm start.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And so, here is a possible picture.
MS Analytics Class 2021: When I showed you the two dimensional LP with just the numerical example in the beginning, I didn't mention that, although you might have noticed from the coefficients that it was actually the furniture making problem for two of the products right so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You know some of the numbers are kind of little suspicious so here's a picture of that two dimensional linear programming model and then, if I add another variable to the model so three furniture types, instead of two it becomes a three dimensional region.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now if i've already sold the two dimensional problem and I wanted them solve the three dimensional problem that would be like adding a new variable to the model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Then it would be much more efficient to start from the old solution might be able to get to the new optimal point in one step.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Whereas if I start from the origin here and I try to get from here it's going to take me 123123 however you slice it it's going to take at least three iterations.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if I really optimize it's likely to take advantage of the information that I have a solution to a related model and come up with a new solution faster.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So how do we tell the profit model solver that we want to really optimize.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so this is a solver option solver option is called basis equals warm start, so the warm start as a as a good way to think of that and that's basically what the process is doing.
MS Analytics Class 2021: There are a couple of caveats here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And that is that when we re optimize the model we need to turn off the pre solver so we saw that there were options.
MS Analytics Class 2021: For the pre sell where we could say solve with LP slash pre solver equals none turn it off, you can say aggressive basic the reason that you need to turn it off is because.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The relationship between the the model and the modified model is not necessarily the same as the pre sold model and a pre sell modified model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because you might have gotten rid of something in the pre solver that you change using your modifications and it's not able to use that solution to jumpstart it so when we say basically warm start, we always have to follow that with pre solver equals none.
MS Analytics Class 2021: They might say, well, those Jesus that says why don't they automatically do that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Good question i've asked that question myself.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The other solver option that you see here specifies to really optimize whether you want to use the primal or the dual simplex So if you don't specify anything with the algorithm equals, what do you think will happen.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well what's the default solver for linear programming models, the default algorithm I should say you remember.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Your legs.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's the dual simplex So if you don't specify.
MS Analytics Class 2021: you're going to get the dual simplex So why is it important to specify will in certain situations, the primal simplex is the is the clear choice in this example, but I showed you.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This trajectory here is the trajectory of the primal simplex algorithm right moving from an extreme point to another extreme point and improving the objective value so you can see, in the case where we're adding variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That we should prefer to use the primal simplex as a re optimizer and the general rule of thumb is that when the optimal solution to your original model is going to be feasible for the modified model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Then you're going to use the primal simplex so changing the objective is another example, so we talked about adding variables, if you change the objective.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You haven't changed feasibility, so your optimal solution is still going to be feasible and so you are probably better off using the primal simplex.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Otherwise, if either you know that you're going to cut the solution off with some of your modifications or you're not sure then probably you want to use the dual simplex okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So these are some examples of some instances, like changing constraint or variable bounds could cut off the solution, adding constraints could cut off the solution, so if you think it could then you use a dual simplex.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now the dual simplex is never a bad choice, so, even if the primal simplex would have done better.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's still going to be cheaper to really optimize unless you make Wholesale changes so if you're not sure whether what to specify, you can always just punch use the duel and it is going to make it faster.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So when.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We optimize.
MS Analytics Class 2021: reauthorization only allows to use the primal or dual simplex remember there's another algorithm called the interior point algorithm.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's not suitable free optimizing just because of the way that it's kind of conceptually based.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But you can use that interior point algorithm for the original model that you solve as long as you use that crossover option, which is the default and the reason that's important is because that drives it to a corner, where the simplex methods can start from okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let me illustrate some of those.
Karen Fireman: Bad excuse me, Professor.
Karen Fireman: Can you repeat that last part.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Sure, so so think of there being two models models are an original model and a modified model we're gonna have to solve the original model and then re optimize the modified model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We can't really optimize in the interior point algorithm, we can only use the primordial simplex, but we can solve the original model using an interior point algorithm so that's solved with LP algorithm equals IP.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But if we do that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We have to push it to a corner and the crossover option for the interior point algorithm pushes it into the corner.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because remember that when we have a problem that has altered optimal solutions, the interior point algorithm tends to like solutions that are.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Compromises or in between two of those optimal solutions so unless you use the crossover option it's not going to force it into a corner and the primal and dual simplex methods don't know how to start without starting from the corners okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now there are not a tremendous number of problems which the interior point algorithm is faster than the primordial simplex so most likely you won't have to worry about this at all if you just say solve the uses of dual simplex you can we optimize you don't have to worry about it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so let's look at some examples of those changes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this time i'm going to re optimize and I want to pay attention to how much time it takes to solve the modified problems.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, not exactly because, if I look at how much time it takes to solve most of these models looking in the in the solution summary table they all take 0.00 seconds because they're all small.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But a surrogate for the for the time it takes to solve would be the number of iterations right So if I look at these models, the number of iterations so my original model here took what 12 iterations.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And the second one took.
MS Analytics Class 2021: 16 iterations.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So they're all taking about the same 13 so let's now look when we when we re optimize how that changes so this time i'm going to open up mcdonald's re up.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i've already made some modifications to the so called basic model, so what i'm going to start from here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Is the problem with upper bounds, and since i'm doing this, a priori i'm just adding this in as an upper bound for the decision variables so at least zero and and most two.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so when I use my first title i'll say the McDonalds problem with upper bounds so also that from scratch just say solve.
MS Analytics Class 2021: print, the solution, then let's consider what happens when we force it to put a big MAC in the diet.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so now i'm going to say solve with LP slash basis equals a warm start requires me to say pre solver equals none just come come as a piece now here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because I haven't said algorithm equals it's going to choose the dual simplex right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Is that the best choice here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We want to ask ourselves, does the old solution have a big MAC end because that's, the only way they would still be feasible.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, if you, if you remember what the solution looked like there was no big MAC there right, so the dual simplex is the right choice here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So I could say algorithm equals DS but it's the default, so I can just leave it out okay so then let's unfixed the big MAC right, so now we don't have to have the big MAC in the diet will add in these constraints, these are what i'm calling ad hoc constraints, so the first one says.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The number of sauces that you can get is that most of the number of sauces that you are entitled to based on your MIC chicken orders, so the left hand side is the total number of sources of any kind that's how that implicit variables define.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then, if you have six piece orders you get to nine piece orders to get three and 20 piece orders you get six now, you might say.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, how do I know which kind, they are the model gets to choose right this just specifies how many total sauces you can get and the model will choose the best ones to satisfy the recommended daily allowances.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so that's that's one of the constraints that we discussed, and this is a good example I will point out of a constraint that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: makes more sense to declare with variable terms on both sides right because the limit really kind of depends on what you order.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now I could I could move all these things to the left hand side, and I could say.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Total num sauce minus this minus this minus this is less than equal to zero that doesn't make it easier to understand that makes it hard understand.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So that it's you're allowed to enter constraints in like this, and when it's natural it's an advantage okay so next constraints says he can't get more toppings, then you order salads.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can't get more dressings when you order salads.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You have to order three drinks, so we can relax that two at most three if you want it to get waters.
MS Analytics Class 2021: here's more the interesting one, this is the limit on the calories from fat.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It says that the intake of calories from fat is it most point three times intake of calories.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the more natural way to describe this constraint, would be to say intake of calories from fat divided by intake of calories that most point three.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The road, for that is that it's not a linear constraint.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So when I multiply it out this basically has the same information content but it leaves as a linear programming model and that's significant because we can solve them more efficiently right but it that is saying that most 30% of the calories can be calories from fat.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so we'll call this the McDonalds day daily diet model with ad hoc constraints.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what LP bicycles warm start resolving equals none so it's going to really optimize it from the last solve so the last one would be the McDonalds daily diet model with a big man that's the solution that it's starting from.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And again, do I want to use the primer the dual simplex.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what do I do I added a bunch of constraints, is that likely to retain the feasibility of the old solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Probably not so the dual simplex is the right choice, so, even though I didn't specify I kind of I kind of did specify.
MS Analytics Class 2021: All right, print, the solution and then just to see what will happen i'm gonna get rid of this kind of artificial condition, where we put a limit of two.
MS Analytics Class 2021: On the condiments and drinks so i'm going to take anything that's a sauce or a topping or dressing or a drink and remove the upper bound by setting it to plus infinity okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So that'll leave the upper bounds on things like sides and entrees, but these things, since they kind of should be allowed to have a cricket are 20 peacenik nuggets we should be able to get 600 packs if that's what we want or six Barbecue.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so we'll move remove those kind of artificial ones.
MS Analytics Class 2021: An hour call that mcdonald's daily diet model with the kitchen sink because has everything.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And again i'm going to solve it LP bicycles warm start to celebrate equals none.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now, in this case it's kind of a toss up whether I should choose the primal or the dual simplex method, because i'm actually removing these bounce.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But i'm gonna i'm just gonna lazy me is a dual simplex that's kind of guy am.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let's try this let's submitted.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, again we're going to have a number of different models and you can use the table of contents to jump between them, if you want.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So our first model was $6 need two cents that's the model with upper bounds we've seen that solution before.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Then the next one is the big MAC so it's likely to increase the cost because it's not an optimal solution to the full model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it does $7 and 96 cents.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That solution looks like this you'll you'll expect to see the big MAC in there there it is and various other supporting foods.
MS Analytics Class 2021: notice that we haven't made the variables integral right and that's another thing that was pointed out, that is a deficiency of the model will do that in the next class not to worry.
MS Analytics Class 2021: All right, so that's let's look at the I think I should have done this first here let's look at the number of iterations only three so we re optimize in just a few iterations.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's look at the next change, this is the one that has the ad hoc constraints is supposed to be more realistic.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Re optimizing took nine iterations this time less than before, but again, in this case we're adding a number of different constraints, you know four or five new constraints, the model, instead of just changing changing one or adding one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And you can see that it's starting to look a little more realistic so, for example, let's see our side salads we're ordering about 70% of one, and the number of protons and French dressing is limited by that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And likewise if there was anything else that had toppings or sauces looks like there isn't we have no nuggets so we don't get any sauces it's it's starting to look a little bit more reasonable.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Look at the last one here when we throw the kitchen sink.
MS Analytics Class 2021: How long does it take or how many iterations in this case, only one so that was very efficient and let's see how it changes the objective value it was our objective value before.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it was in the previous one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: here's where it would be nice to have a slightly smaller font size, so I could see more of a table of contents $7 and basically 80 cents and the new solution has.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The same objective value in fact it's the same solution so, even though we gave ourselves and increase flexibility to have more sauces and so forth.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We couldn't really take advantage of it because we didn't have any of the foods that allowed us to do those so we had we had salad but we only had 660 8% of one, so it wasn't enough to allow us to go crazy on dressing recruit cons or anything.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so illustrate some of the ways that we can do model modifications and profit model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And this idea of re optimizing now re optimizing, it is important concept, not just for linear programming models, but also for.
MS Analytics Class 2021: integer and mixed integer models and also for nonlinear models, but it's implemented in a slightly different way, depending on what class of models you're looking at.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So for LP it's the base equals warm start for the other types of models will address it in the next two classes, because it'll look a little bit different.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let me look at one more model modification and then we're we'll we'll take a break and give you a pretty straightforward breakout exercise.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And this is kind of cleaning up a question that arose before so sometimes the model modifications or not so kind of systematic they're not just like.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Changing a parameter or dropping a constraint, sometimes they involve some manipulation of the different parts of the model so one of the questions we kind of left open was.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If we could hypnotize our workers and get them to come and do overtime hours for say $15 and 25 cents right the dual value is 1.3 the nominal rate for Labor was $14 this is less than 14 plus 1.3.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If we can do that, so that we expect that we might want to use some overtime, in that case, can we modify our model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: To tell us what the best number of overtime hours to use so clearly as we start to use the overtime hours it's going to increase the net profit.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But there's a decreasing margin marginal utility of those additional overtime hours so eventually we can't take as much advantage of them, so we can't predict how many.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We want it to us, we have to actually make a modification to our model and find out that way, but this is like I said kind of an ad hoc model modification.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let's look at the constraints that control the availability of the resource, so the color usage constraints, so it says you can't use more than there is available, so one of the things that I could try and do.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let's see it's I don't know how much overtime, I want to use so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: What kind of a model element would that correspond to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Something i'm trying to decide the value of but a priori I don't know what its value is going to be, that would be a.
MS Analytics Class 2021: constraint objective decision variable.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Decision variable describes that right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we know.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We probably want to use some overtime, but we don't know how much.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We want to live, while to decide for us that's a decision variable so let's say my decision variable is called over time.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And if I can actually do this in the try and type here, let me consider changing the right hand side here and i'll just say, plus hopefully this will come out over time.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So instead of availability i'll bump the semi colon so I can do that i'm sure I can do that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And just add whoops I didn't work so well sorry.
MS Analytics Class 2021: doesn't want to let me draw okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: There we go get rid of it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and say availability plus over time would that work.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It wouldn't.
MS Analytics Class 2021: pardon.
Swanson J, Charles: You haven't specified which resource.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah so so that would increase the availability of Labor but unless they all came in, with a.
MS Analytics Class 2021: peg legs in a piece of metal under their arm i'm not going to be able to increase all of my resources, so instead of just adding overtime to all of them.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I want a way to add overtime to just select one of these constraints and it turns out that there is a nice way to do this in pocket model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'll just show you here let's see.
MS Analytics Class 2021: trying to get rid of it sorry.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, here we go.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And that is using an if then.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And this is kind of a strange kind of context to be saying using an if then.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, here we go.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm going to say if the resources Labor then overtime, so how is this different than the way that we typically use an if then.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Statement usually if condition, then statement the pocket model also allows us to use this with expressions.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If condition, then expression, so in this case it just adds over time, when the resources Labor.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But it doesn't add it when it's metal and it doesn't matter when it's working, so this is a construct that allows us to allow for special cases and families of constraints.
MS Analytics Class 2021: or in the expressions that define implicit variables or objectives, this is a nice nice tool to use okay so let's see how that kind of filters down through the model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let me go into studio and i'm going to look at modifying the furniture making model to include the option of overtime, so this is called furniture overtime, not surprisingly.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, because I might want to vary the cost of overtime, I think, in this case i've got $15 and 20 cents i'll just define that to be a macro variables, so I can easily change that value and see what the effect is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i've defined a new decision variable called over time it's non negative again that makes sense right what would correspond to the have negative over time, that would be very strange kinda like relativity.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So how will that change the model so one of the things that is going to do is it's going to change the usage constraints.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, as I indicated in the slightest says if ours Labor than overtime, the parentheses here are optional I think they're helpful and kind of showing us what the condition is but they're not necessarily the compiler can figure out if it's between if and then it's the condition.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's also going to affect my costs, you have to pay for it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let's look at the expression for total cost it's the sum of over the resources, the cost times the amount used.
MS Analytics Class 2021: plus the difference between the cost of overtime and the cost of Labor the nominal charge for overtime times variable amount of overtime Okay, so we pay for the cost of Labor for the overtime hours as part of amount use the Labor and the incremental costs gets carried by overtime.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because we use the implicit variables, now that automatically recalculates the budget constraint, as we change the expression for total cost.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it also factored that into the objective through total costs so by using those implicit variables, we have less modifications to make to our model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: To make these kind of sweeping changes so let's solve it and we'll see, in addition to the non prod variables, how much overtime, we use.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm also expanding the usage constraints those the ones that we modified this a check and make sure the compiler is changing just one of those and not the other two.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so that, and you have a homework.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Part of your homework for this week you're basically answering the same question for brewing Labor so you'll be kind of mimicking this so you can pay more attention now right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right so so here is the expand and what we expect to see is for the user to Labor constraint it's going to add overtime, to the right hand side.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, it kind of did that it's attracted it all from the left hand side it's but it's the same thing, so it did that correctly, it didn't affect the metal or wood constraints.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So now let's look at the solution here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Our objective value is gone up, but not by a tremendous amount it was 18 21.5 before.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But remember that we're very close to the dual value on this on this calculation, so we didn't expect to see a big change.
MS Analytics Class 2021: terms of the solution now we're making only bookcases in bed frames and we're using eight and a half hours of overtime roughly.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, and likewise, you can see that we're not using all the available metal raising all the available wood and we're using in essence more than the available amount of Labor, so this is equal to the availability of Labor plus the number of overtime hours okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So Questions before I send you to to work on a breakout exercise.
MS Analytics Class 2021: To get some new tools to use and.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This idea re optimization in fact that's what your breakout exercise concerns.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So I put it up your your you already you already have it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what i'm asking you to do is when we originally re optimized for the calories that I was called mcdonald's calories and you might want to sit make the same as same change that I did instead of maximizing calories minimizing calories instead.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But we didn't know about the optimization so we didn't use it so i'm going to see if you can modify that program so that you re optimized instead of solving it from scratch.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so we'll we'll do like I guess about.
MS Analytics Class 2021: 20 minutes, I will give you a chance to work on the breakout exercise and have some fabulous leisure time, but do you remember that we are paying for this, because we're because of our preamble.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The information about linkedin we're going to go longer than nine o'clock, so why don't we come back at.
MS Analytics Class 2021: 25 minutes after the hour.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I will the sound myself, you can go into your breakout groups and then we'll come back in.
The zoo by but.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I didn't send on the zoom earlier, some of you now.
For.
20 Jordan.
Great I wish that I could go until.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You have questions about the breakout exercise it's not so bad.
Karen Fireman: yeah I have a question, Professor its parent.
Okay.
Swanson J, Charles: well.
Karen Fireman: How do you solve it right, well, it seemed like you wanted that line solve with LP slash basis equals warm start pre solver equals none is that was that was a key maybe to that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Probably the pre The pre solver equals none, as is important.
Karen Fireman: Maybe you can go over for us oh.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Sure me open that up see.
MS Analytics Class 2021: got too many.
Karen Fireman: Too many stuffs here let's.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, I think this is the one let's see.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so here's the code.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Is that right.
Swanson J, Charles: panels calories yeah you're inferring sure over time.
MS Analytics Class 2021: There we go.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So here, it says solve Ob J calories right, and this is just going to solve it from scratch so i'm going to want to say.
MS Analytics Class 2021: With.
MS Analytics Class 2021: LP slash analysis always say basis.
MS Analytics Class 2021: equals warm start.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And pre solver.
MS Analytics Class 2021: equals none.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now I don't know it's kind of sometimes it's mysterious when it comes to whether it recognizes the syntax or not here, probably in this case because i've left the Ob J calories in here that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Is the reason those things aren't in blue so let's try this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: What am I getting an error for was checking.
Wilson Pineda: think you have selected our Professor.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm good at that aren't.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm at least i'm consistent.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let's let's see if it was able to do the the optimization.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We can see here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Seven iterations of check the log here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So in this case it's giving us a warning here, I think, in the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In the slide for the exercise I said what if you use the primal simplex or the dual some FLEX so it looks like, in this case, using the dual simplex it tries to use the starting point that we have, so the basis is a way of representing.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's a way of describing the extreme point solution Okay, so it says that it's not feasible so let's try the other alternative here and we'll say.
MS Analytics Class 2021: algorithm.
MS Analytics Class 2021: equals PS.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm gonna try it again.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And let's check the number of iterations again.
MS Analytics Class 2021: there's The first one is 12.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And the second one is house let's see here we go.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Only three so it looks like it was successful this time let's look at the log.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah so that you can see that it goes it goes in there and it doesn't give us a warning, so that in the first case it's going to be hard for me to describe exactly why it didn't work in one case and it worked in the other.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But let's let's leave it at that, so it is working and it that the reason that I made that suggestion to try them both was because I when I ran it myself.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I got that strength that that warning so basically in one case it wasn't able to take advantage of the re optimization and basically solve the problem from scratch.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So no advantage there that answer your question Karen.
Karen Fireman: I I believe so, so when I think you did is you cut out that semi colon at the end after you're done the warm start line and then you put an algorithm equals PS, and that was the primal.
Karen Fireman: solution and that one did work.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this could have all been on one line is just that it it's I was kind of running out of space yeah.
Karen Fireman: And remember sure sure I just want to be friends with you.
yep.
Karen Fireman: Thank you.
Karen Fireman: Okay sure.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let's um.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's delve into this this class of linear programming models called network models and you seen a couple of examples of networks, I showed you pictures of them we're going to get into them and a little more depth.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So network flow models are at the end of this additional topics lesson, because, in order to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: be able to declare the types of variables and constraints in these models it's helpful to have some of the operators.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That we saw earlier in the chapter.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The way that the solution method works for these network flow models is partly based on this idea of re optimization so it's useful to have seen the model updates first.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And network models are also a good bridge to integer and mixed integer linear programming models so network flow models have a property that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If the data is integral meaning if you have whole number data, then the solution is also going to necessarily be integral without your having to specify it so that's why they're a nice bridge and i'll talk a little bit more about that as we.
MS Analytics Class 2021: get into these types of models once you see what the structure is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so one objective here is to recognize when you have a model that might have network structure, so it might not be completely.
MS Analytics Class 2021: defined on a network, but it might have some of that same structure that we can take advantage of.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And the way I try and describe this to people was let's say you have a model and you were describing it to a colleague you saying, well, it has you know this and that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And if you end up making a picture with arrows on a napkin, then you probably have some network structure that you may be able to take advantage of.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But we'll also talk specifically about problems that are defined on networks and how to formulate those problems kind of starting from starting from data sets.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So.
MS Analytics Class 2021: One of the problems that we've looked at before the transportation problem is kind of a classic network problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And you remember the diagram that we wrote down for the transportation problem, this is this small example where we're we have beer available in Chicago and Detroit we're sending it to Boston New York and Toronto.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So a network consists of a set of nodes in this case, these circles, with the letters inside joined by a set of arcs and typically we kind of think of the arcs carrying a material between the nodes like barrels of beer going from Chicago to Boston.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It doesn't necessarily have to be material sometimes it's just information but it's probably easiest to think of a network as being kind of a physical network so, even though these arrows.
MS Analytics Class 2021: aren't like curvy and going around roads and stuff that's basically what what they represent the transportation logistics of getting those barrels from Chicago to Boston probably driving them in a truck right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now, if we look at a larger transportation problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Maybe what we're transporting is perishable or somewhat time sensitive, so it may be the case that we can't always ship from every origin to every destination, you might be that we can only.
MS Analytics Class 2021: ship to nearby zip codes alright so it's possible that we have kind of the structure of a transportation problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But not all of these origin destination pairs are possible, so we have just some of the arcs present in the network so network problems aren't always complete in the sense that you can't always get from every origin to every destination.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In some cases, only some of the arcs that you see here may be present in the network but otherwise we might still want to find the cheapest way to ship.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And, and what maybe more general.
MS Analytics Class 2021: kind of physical transportation network might have in addition to origins and destinations or say factories and customers, maybe we have warehouses, we have some intermediate sites.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So you start to get more kind of complicated structures of logistical networks, where you don't just have.
MS Analytics Class 2021: one set of origins on one side and one set of destinations, on the other side and arrows going from left to right everywhere.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, so the general network, you have the set of nodes and some of those nodes are connected with arrows or arcs right and where the arcs are kind of determines the structure of the network it's not always complete in the sense of the transportation problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, but there are other types of networks they're kind of like physical temporal networks and a good example of that is production and inventory model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Where we might have some notion of things moving kind of physically, from production to demand but we're also moving forward temporarily and storing inventory from one period to another so that's kind of a mixed bag, but then we might have also purely relational networks.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Representative scheduling or an assignment type of problem like.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Which applicants are assigned to which jobs, you know we're not like marching the applicants from one place to another we're just selecting them for a particular job so it's it's not.
MS Analytics Class 2021: physical or even physical temporal so networks arise in a lot of different contexts and sometimes we have optimization models.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That are purely based in the network and sometimes that's just part of the model, there are other complicating features of the model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if I have a network.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The typical constraint again thinking of kind of the physical.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Network let's isolate a particular node in the network, like this one here so there's some arcs coming in and there's some arcs going out.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this is the kind of typical note in network, so we have some variable flow in these arcs kind of represent decision variables in our model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Coming from some other nodes there's variable flow out of the node again representing decision variables, but there might also be a fixed flow in and a fixed flow out.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right in this case i'm indicating that there's some supplier and some demand it may be the case that in some cases there's just a supply or just a demand, but in general they may be some inputs and outputs that are fixed they're not decision variables, they would be say parameters.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And to put this into a more kind of prop up molly.
MS Analytics Class 2021: notation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Again, supply and demand might be parameter arrays and total flow in and total flow out as I used them in the transportation model we'd be implicit variables that add up all of the variable flow in and variable flow out.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the typical constraint in a network is what we call a flow conservation or a flow balance constraint basically just says and i'm going to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Try to annotate this just to show how lousy I am at it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: As we just kind of draw a line between the inputs and the outputs and we equate those two things, so it would say that the flow in plus the supply will be equal to the flow out, plus the demand okay just making sure that everything comes comes into the node goes out of the note again.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and
MS Analytics Class 2021: This, in some cases.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We might relax to an inequality let's think about the case of the transportation model, the transportation model is kind of a classic network problem and.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Instead of being an equation at the factories, we don't have to send out everything that's there.
MS Analytics Class 2021: right if the total supply is more than a total demand, and there are some places that don't send out all of their supply so, in some cases, this flow conservation or flow balance constraint is going to be replaced by inequality, it just depends on the context.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so this it's pretty straightforward.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But it begs the question of how we define these implicit variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So in the transportation model, the flow into.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A destination or a customer was the sum of all of the factories or the origins.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Of that origin destination pairs all that flow all those decision variables, but in a general network there's only some of those arcs.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the picture looks something like this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: whoops like this, so i've got I my typical node K, I have an implicit variable called flow in the individual variables that's called them num ship.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And they're coming from some other nodes in the network into K, but it's not.
MS Analytics Class 2021: All of the other nodes it's just some of the other nodes because every node in the network is kind of unique in the sense that it has some things that ship to it and some things that it ships to and that's determined by the structure of the network.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this might be a first attempt at how I could define that I could say the flow in this again in its defined for each node in the network some over all the arcs.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Looking at the picture from either K.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Of the membership value, those are the decision variables and i'm sure okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's say we tried to do it this way.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And we ran our model, the compiler would give us a little love note and it's kind of strange, the first time you get this and I think some of the students have seen this already in a different context, but it says the name K hides an outer declaration and like a lot of those.
MS Analytics Class 2021: messages from the compiler it's kind of mysterious until you understand what it actually means and then you say oh okay that doesn't make sense but it's just hard to decipher it first so What it means is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In the some you're introducing local dummy variables I NK right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In the declaration statement for the array I introduced a local dummy variable called K and the compiler is saying you idiot use the same letter for both.
MS Analytics Class 2021: How am I going to interpret that and of course it figures out some way to interpret it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But the idea is that what is this K here, referred to as it this local dummy variable K or this local dummy variable K and the compiler interprets this in a way.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That leaves this some here as some over all of the arcs in the network and that's not what our intent is our intent is only the arcs that go into a specific node K it's just that it's, this is not the right way to express that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we could try and.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Maybe think about is there some way that I can express.
MS Analytics Class 2021: These arcs so I have a specific K and I want to know all the arcs that ship to that K.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now we have a set.
Karen Fireman: operator, that is designed.
MS Analytics Class 2021: For this very situation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You think what is that.
Karen Fireman: At the slice.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That is, that is, the slice slice that's exactly what i'm thinking of so that doesn't work, but the slice here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The set of arcs that go from some node to K.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Is that's the that's the set that we would like now, here, the differences that we're not introducing a new local dummy parameter K.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Here it's introduced in the declaration for the implicit variables here i'm introducing a new local dummy variable I.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But K is actually referring to the K that's floating around in the statement here because i'm not introducing a new local dummy variable also in in K.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this works and, like, I said that that's exactly what the slice is designed for, but on the other hand, it looks kind of its kind of it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, I mean that's not the kind of code that I wanted to program and I would, I would also not like to try and have to explain it to someone else we didn't know what the slice was.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It turns out that there's a more graceful way to do the same thing that implicitly uses the slice operator, and this is what will settle on.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I apologize if this is hiding behind the transcription.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's exactly the same as the statement at the top, except for their parentheses around the K.
MS Analytics Class 2021: What difference would that make.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Think about the role that parentheses play in proc model syntax.
MS Analytics Class 2021: They say evaluate what's inside the parentheses, and whether that's around something that we're going to print or when we call a SAS function.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it evaluates the argument and then it applies assess function, or it evaluates what's inside the parentheses, and then prints that value so having the parentheses around the case sometimes also called casting.
MS Analytics Class 2021: says, look at that specific value of K, instead of introducing a new local dummy parameter Okay, so when you have, and this is a getting into the weeds a little bit.
MS Analytics Class 2021: When you have a two dimensional set you need to local dummy parameters to represent the typical element, a local dummy parameter is always either.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A number or a scale or a string is the scale or it's a unit thing, so if I have to, then I needed to pull of local dummy variables like I NK now.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can put a value in here, instead of ir K, you could put zero or one or Fred.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So you can you don't have to have local dummy variables in those positions, you could have something that evaluates to a specific number of specific string.
MS Analytics Class 2021: that's what K, is doing here it's the value of K and that correctly calculates the flow in.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this is kind of a one time deal you figure it out once and then you just use it whenever you're formulating a network model it's kind of natural way you do it, but it has parentheses around the the node.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And if if you believe that flowing works in that way flow out works exactly the same way, and when I formulate one of these network models, we call.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A model that just has these network constraints these flow conservation constraints bounds on the decision variables appear network model and peer network models can be solved super efficiently.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Sometimes, our problems have other constraints and variables, in addition to that structure.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But those pure network problems can be solved, like the wind.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So.
MS Analytics Class 2021: can think of a.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Solving a general LP in every step we're solving a system of linear equations when you have a pure network model, instead of solving a system of linear equations you're basically solving a specially structured system that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: is just kind of a can be solved by a simple graph algorithm and as simple graph algorithm a typical one is like let's say you are using Google maps and you are here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Somewhere in the in Manhattan and you want to go over here, and then it finds you the shortest route between them and it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: calculates it so quickly that you don't really even notice that it's thinking about it alright so that's that's an example of a simple network.
MS Analytics Class 2021: algorithm it's called the shortest path algorithm well if you can replace the linear algebra by a simple graph algorithm That means that each iteration can be run very, very quickly, and so you can do many, many iterations and the time it takes you to typically only do a single one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So that's how those problems can be solved so quickly it's the same kind of overall structure as the primal simplex or the dual simplex.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But each iteration is super fast Okay, now there are ways that you can kind of incorporate additional variables and constraints and to try and take advantage of the structure of these systems.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But the techniques that do that are are kind of involved and they tend to reduce the efficiency of the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Of the what we call the network simplex algorithm which is using the structure of the primal and dual simplex with these graph algorithms to do the the the main work step inside each iteration.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the way that prakash model solves problems that have network structure for that you suspect have network structure is really kind of neat.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So you don't really even have to specify what the structure is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: All you do is you say solve with LP slash algorithm equals NS for network simplex right and then what will happen is that the solver will go into your model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and try and extract a network structure, so the network structure is determined by the kind of pattern of coefficients of zeros and plus and minus ones in your constraints, but you don't have to know the details of how it finds the structure.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Just to know that it goes in and it finds the biggest network structure that it can then it solves that pure network model defined by those variables and constraints.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and uses that as a warm start for the problem, so it adds back in the variables and constraints that don't satisfy the network structure.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and uses, then the network solution as a warm start.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the the the nice thing about it is you don't actually have to specify what the structure is you don't have to tell it what the nodes are what the arcs are it finds it all for you right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, if your model is a pure network model, then it will find 100% of the rows and columns now here rows and columns just correspond to variables and constraints.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If you think back way back to the beginning, I said that if we have a linear programming model, you can think of it as having a constraint matrix the rows of that matrix correspond to the constraints and the columns to the variables that's what the rows and columns referred to here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Then it solves it optimally with this fast network algorithm if it doesn't solve it as a peer network model then it re optimizes from that solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it allows you to specify, whether you want to re optimize using the primal or the dual simplex so again related back to this idea of re optimization that we talked about before.
MS Analytics Class 2021: When you use the network simplex the solution summary table counts and shows you, the number of network iterations and primal or dual simplex iterations Okay, so you got any old model and the old linear programming model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You think well you know when I describe this i'm using arrows and circles so maybe it has network structure, so I use the network simplex.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And if it has the structure it takes advantage of it if it doesn't then basically lost nothing because if it doesn't find any structure at all, then it's just like re optimizing starting from from no warm start.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let me show this to you.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm going to do this as a DEMO.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if I have a transportation model then it's going to be sold as a peer network problem so i'm going to build on that a little bit.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm going to use our model with a calculated distances, with the factories in the customers around North America and i'm going to add an additional restriction and say that the number of units that ship across the Mississippi river is that most I think 750.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so it's not just a transportation model, it has another additional complicating constraint.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And because this is an exercise program it's got a weird name less than three problem eight.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'm going to i'm going to solve it using the network simplex and i'm going to see if it solves as a peer network model and i'm going to look and see what kind of structures found so you can see how to how to get how to where to find these things.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let me go in.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In the practices for Chapter three was eight.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right so you'll you'll see starting off with.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Again I part of this problem was to go and get the distances from SAS data set in the maps library maps.us city so that's what the data steps are doing.
MS Analytics Class 2021: here's my limit on the number of units that can cross the Mississippi.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And again, you can think of whatever you want to ship to see whether that's a lot or a little, but with its relative the supplies in the man's.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So calculate the distances here's the model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The constraints that we had here's the new constraint, remember that weird variable called East there was a zero or one that variable was telling us, whether we were East of the Mississippi or not, and so, if I want to look at the arcs that cross the Mississippi.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Those would be the origins and destinations for which the east of the origin, plus the east of the destination equals one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Meaning that either the factory is on one side and the customers, on the other, or vice versa Okay, so this seemed like weird variables to have, but this is exactly why they were there.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So something over all the arcs that cross the Mississippi that total amount can be at most 750, which was the Mississippi limit okay so that's a it's a complicating or a side constraint.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let's solve it within that network simplex.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And let's when we look at the solution let's see how many units actually cross that's the body of that constraint.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And i'll print those arcs that cross, so we can see which ones we used.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then of course the the solution has a lot of origin destination pairs so i'm not going to look in detail at the solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let's run it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so there's our problem about 2000 variables going to add any variables, we just added a constraint from last time we ran it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So you can see that it's using the network simplex.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now, you may or may not remember what the objective value was before so let's not worry too much about that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: here's our first clue see in the solution summary table we have iterations and iterations to so iterations are the number of network iterations he's a really fast ones.
MS Analytics Class 2021: iterations to or the cleanup iterations where we have to re optimize using the primal or the dual simplex, so it should be clear from these two numbers that there's actual number here and iterations to that it didn't solve as if your network problem because it had to re optimize.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It looks like we used all have the capacity to cross the Mississippi, and these are the shipments that it shows.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In the table here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the rest of the story is going to be in the log file.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So in the log before it solves the model you'll see.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A section where it talks about the problem characteristics.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The pre solver and then the network simplex and here's where we find out how big the network was that it found so it said he has 161 rows and rows correspond to constraints 1924 columns.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So all of the variables are included and 61 out of 162 of the constraints, you can probably guess if there was one constraint that didn't qualify that it's going to be the new one that we added right, that was the one that didn't.
MS Analytics Class 2021: didn't follow the right patterns for being a network structure.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The other thing it's a little mysterious is that it says that there's one component.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That basically talks to the connectedness of a network right So if you had instead of like drawings of arcs.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If the arcs were actually you know physically, something that connected the the nodes and you pick part of the network up.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If you pick could pick it all up in one piece and hold it by one of the nodes that would be one component fits separates into sub networks, then you have multiple components and I can I can create that situation pretty easily in just a minute.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So these are the fast iterations.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And the value of log freak is quite large for the network simplex because the iterations are so quick, so you only seen the first and last.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then the cleanup phase where it's re optimizing using the dual.
MS Analytics Class 2021: there's only three iterations so we're just missing the second.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let's so we find the the structure the network that it found in the log.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can see the the iterations the two different types in the logs and kind of as a summary in the results, you can see in the solution summary table how many iterations of each kind.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if I want to show you a problem that has multiple components.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I can make a fairly minor change the model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's say.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We don't let any arcs or any shipments cross the Mississippi river so that was the limit on the number so changing it from 750 to zero could result in one of two things either it's feasible to ship exclusively on either side of the Mississippi but more expensive or the model is infeasible.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it would depend on how how much supply there is in factories and how much demand there is west of the Mississippi and east of the Mississippi.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it turns out that, in this case it's it's feasible.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's going to be a little bit more expensive if I don't allow any arcs to grow cross.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In this case, you can see that there's no iterations to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If we look at the log file.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can see that it says how many rows and columns and two components so basically the two components are everything west of the Mississippi and everything East of the Mississippi.
MS Analytics Class 2021: When you tell you that it can't use any of the arcs that cross there because the sum of their values is that most zero.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It drops those it fixes those zero removes them from the model, and so, then you separate out into two networks.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And that might seem like a bad thing it's actually a very good thing, because both of those sub network, so to speak, those problems can be solved very quickly as peer network problems so solves them separately and then combines the solution to solve the overall problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so that's that's an example that had multiple components.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I would, I would mention, though, that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A friend of mine who works at SAS is giving a free.
MS Analytics Class 2021: seminar about in feasibility and how to diagnose it I think in the in the course folder, for I believe it's this week I gave you a link to sign up for that if you're interested it's on the 20th.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm not i'm not requiring it and obviously it's it's after all the assignments are due, but before the project is done it's not going to help you to your project in any way, but if you're curious about it, it is free.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But it's virtual there no snacks.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Before I go on, I do want to say something about the project i'm really making the project available to you after class which is probably available right now.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You don't have the tools to do it yet.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Some of those tools are gonna have to wait for next week, but some people are get a little antsy and just want to get started, and if you wanted to get in and kind of.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Read over and look at it and look at the data and so forth that's fine, but if it's somewhat completely mysterious you don't know how you would start to attack it just wait till next week.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so let me go back in.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what we saw just to summarize is that it's not solved as a pure network model It took three iterations of in this case the dual simplex three optimize and we can see the network structure that it found.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In terms of the rows and columns remember rose correspond to constraints columns correspond to decision variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so that's that's how the network simplex algorithm works and how to call it, it seems like it's pretty straightforward you didn't have to know anything about the problem, other than just well let's try the network simplex and see what happens.
MS Analytics Class 2021: On the other hand, we want to look at.
MS Analytics Class 2021: models that are kind of defined starting from network structure right so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: What i'm going to do is i'm going to go back to our problem, our model with the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The factories and the customers in North America and i'm kind of going to key in on a specific geographic area.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, this would be a little bit of a jump geography lesson today if you're not from this area so in this area in Washington state and Montana and Idaho we have some factories there's a factory in spokane in a smaller factory in bozeman.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And there's some customers, we have customers in missoula and Helena in Billings and cody and others that are off the map like down I 15 down to salt lake city, maybe, something is down there.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's look at.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A shipment that goes from factory say spokane to a customer see in Helena so you probably drive along it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: To missoula and then cut across on 12 to Helena so I can kind of break down the shipments from factories to customers to some road segments right and so smoking in missoula would definitely be one of those segments, but probably.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I might want to introduce garrison as kind of a an intermediate point so I could look at the segment from missoula garrison and garrison to Helena then add those three to get the travel time from spokane to Helena.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if I kind of look at all the different best routes from factories to customers.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I can break them all down into segments, and if I know the travel time or transit time for those segments, I can add them up to get the travel time from any factory to any customer.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'm thinking i'm going from the distances to actual travel unit shipping costs Okay, by getting data on how long it would take to ship or how much it would cost to ship a unit along any of these segments.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let's say I have a data set.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And i'm picking out those origin destination pairs from this larger data set so Those are all the pairs that you saw there are many of them.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, like bozeman to Billings or to their spokane in missoula the mode of transportation is almost exclusively ground and until SAS is able to finish the land bridge to Hawaii we're going to have to use.
MS Analytics Class 2021: we're gonna have to use air as the mode of transportation to get our goods to Hawaii because we have a customer that's in honolulu and then the unit shipping costs, so if I have a large data set that has all of those segments as origin destination pairs and by all the segments, I mean.
MS Analytics Class 2021: All the segments between factories and customers and for lack of a better name i'm going to call these intermediate points trend shipment points right so probably in my model garrison would be a trend shipment point do you, it would be a trend shipment point.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the origins could be.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Factories customers or these trends shipment points alright so so this should be enough data for me to calculate the actual unit shipping costs from every factory to every customer and solve the exact model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if I did, that I would be formulating the problem on a network, it would be a road network, consisting of all those segments.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And we might say, well, I didn't see any arrows there well think of one of those segments as representing transport.
MS Analytics Class 2021: One way from spokane to missoula and another way from missoula to spokane those unit shipping costs might be different, I think, for the data for this problem, I assume that they are the same right they might be different because of changes in elevation number of different factors.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let's say I have all this data in this data set.
MS Analytics Class 2021: How do I go from that to formulating the optimization model to solve the problem well.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The arcs are really kind of hiding here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So every pair every origin destination pair corresponds to an Arc in the network.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And that Arc has a corresponding unit unit shipping costs right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So remember our network consists of nodes and arcs so this data set identifies the arcs and our network right and so that kind of helps us start with a formulation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we know from the data set that the origins and destinations are strings or character valued, so the set of arcs then would be a set of pairs of strings so that said here is declared.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then each of those arcs has a unit shipping costs, which is called cost so when I read the data set.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It populates the arcs that's the set name for origin destination pairs that correspond to observations in the data set, and it also populates the numerical parameter a cost Okay, so it both feeds in the numbers and establishes the structure of the network okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what's next well, but I think about my my flow conservation or flow balance constraints, not only do I need to know the arcs I also need to know the notes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay So how do I get the nodes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If I go back to the data said.
MS Analytics Class 2021: well.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The nodes are either in the origin column.
MS Analytics Class 2021: or they're in the destination column.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it's not just the origins, because I have factories that have arcs going out and possibly not coming in it's not just the destinations.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The and the trend shipment nodes could be an either one of those two places so i've got to figure out a way to get the set of nodes from this data set and I can't just read it from origins or just from destinations.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it's a little bit more complicated than than the Read data statements that we've used where node would always be.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A set name it's going to be a little more complicated, in this case turns out that I can use an operator here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And the operator that i'm going to use is the Union aggregation operator.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'm going to look at all of the arcs.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And i'm going to gather up all of the endpoints So if I jays in the set of arcs i'm going to add I n J the set of nodes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So that that will.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It will it will by Union in those it'll give us a set of nodes and it will add some nodes multiple times.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But that just results in a in a set it doesn't matter how many times you try and add it it's just whether it's you're either in or out doesn't matter how many how hard you work to try and get in the set you're either in or you're out.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, in order to determine the set of notes from the set of arcs I needed to use an operator that we learned about as being kind of hard coded in pocket model, there are other ways to do this, you can also do this, using a set of and union, but this is the perhaps the cleanest way.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Then, if I want to read in the rest of the data for the problem, so I have supplier at my factories, I have demand at my customers.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But in the flow balance constraints every node has a supply and every node has a demand right, it was supply plus flow n equals demand plus flow out.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this isn't again a case kind of similar to the when we have missing values.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Where i'm only going to get some of the values read from the SAS data set I need to initialize the other values to some appropriate.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Number so i'm initializing supply to zero, and then it overrides the supply for the factories i'm initializing demand to zero, and it overrides the demand for the customers, so the demand at a factory is zero.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The supply at a customer zero and the supply and demand at a trend shipment known as inbetweeners are both going to be zero.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The reason I need supply and demand to be to be declared over all the nodes is because my flow conservation constraints use that for every note.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so that's.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Basically, the hard issue in formulating these problems.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Let me go and show you solving this USA well now we'll call it a instead of a transportation problem, it becomes what we call a trend shipment problem, because we have these intermediate nodes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'm going to go into studio.
MS Analytics Class 2021: back to the demos folder.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And here i'm going to call it, USA TRAN shipment.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it just kind of repeating what we saw spread out among the slides declare the set of arcs declare the set of nodes and and, like the food types.
MS Analytics Class 2021: When we declare the set of nodes i'm initializing it to be this expression instead of a set literal expression, this is a expression that depends on the set of arcs.
MS Analytics Class 2021: cost is over, art supply and demand over nodes and read the data from.
MS Analytics Class 2021: USA network, which is the the data set that I showed you a piece of on the slide factories and customers we've seen before.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So here are my variables num ship declared over the arcs flow in implicit variables there's the some with the parentheses around the K flow out similar it's just that case in a different position because we're going from no K to other nodes in the network.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Here, my flow balance constraints and, as I mentioned before, in this instance, it makes sense to do it as an inequality.
MS Analytics Class 2021: indicating that if you're a factory you don't have to send everything out and allowing the possibility that we could send more to a customer than they actually want, although minimizing costs won't actually result in that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So I could, depending on whether it's a factory or a customer have an inequality or an equation that's kind of clumsy to do it, I can just leave it as an inequality and it works for all them.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So my objective is to instead of total distance now it's the actual total cost.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, as some over the arcs the cost of the arc times the membership value okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So once you've done all the data reading and the defining of the implicit variables, the the model itself is actually pretty straightforward.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'll solve it with a network simplex.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And because there could potentially be a lot of arcs in the network i'm just going to print the ones that are in the solution, so the ones that have a numb ship value that's positive i'll show you that value.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And, in case I want to do something with the solution i'll put it into a SAS data set with variables origin destination and amount.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let's try this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, apart from setting up the problem it's going to solve very quickly.
MS Analytics Class 2021: he's in the network simplex here's the solution summary.
MS Analytics Class 2021: No iterations to so it solved it as a pure network problem, the objective now is more relatable because it's actually instead of in total number of unit miles it's actually in dollars so it's just shy of $400,000 to do all the shipping.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let's look here's the solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it goes on and on and on, because we use a lot of arcs so again, like in the case of the transportation problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: One one thing that we can consider doing with this solution is allowing ourselves to visualize it in some way.
MS Analytics Class 2021: which would be kind of similar to what we did for that model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But there's another thing that's kind of lacking about the solution hear me describe what I mean.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's look at the very beginning here so there's a shipment from abilene to Dallas okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now is abilene a factory.
MS Analytics Class 2021: turns out, the answer is no abilene is not a factory.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Is Dallas a customer, I think, in this case Dallas is a customer, but this shipment is from a trend shipment node in abilene probably mispronouncing that I should pretend i'm from Texas.
MS Analytics Class 2021: To a customer, but we don't know what factory it came from.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, it could be for any of our factories, so these shipments say how much to ship on this Arc but they don't say where it came from, or, in some cases where it's going to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because we assume that the goods are all indistinguishable so another way of thinking about this this This is like how I like to think about it is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I think this is the right slide.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You recognize what this little yellow thing is here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That this may come as a shock to you, but this is a, this is actually a soccer stadium for ants.
MS Analytics Class 2021: There are a lot of seats here, but what are the and see when there's not game action going on, well, they see trucks go by.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And maybe they can see from the logo that they're from our company and they're part of this trend shipment problem, and they can tell you how much gets shipped.
MS Analytics Class 2021: along the road in one direction, and possibly in the other direction, but they don't know where it came from, and they don't know where it's going to it so it's like an aunt's view of the solution it's somehow.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Not structured, the same as the solution to the transportation problem and transportation problem is more like fedex right we know where things come from and where they're going.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In addition to how much goes along a particular route, so it would be nice if somehow we could get back to that same kind of a solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So take the data that we got from the trend shipment problem and use it to construct a cook a detailed routing instructions for the solution and it turns out, there is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it's not super hard to do, but it requires some programming kind of using pocket model as a programming language.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So basically what you do is you look at all the arcs that are in the solution you look for paths from supply nodes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: These are the factories to demand nodes customers and then you figure out how much you can ship from there and then subtract that off and just keep iterating until you have constructed a set of routes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let me just show you.
MS Analytics Class 2021: What that would look like if we did it for our solution so i'm not not i'm not expecting you to be able to produce something like this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is called net D calm for network decomposition.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It reads the data set that is the solution to the trend shipment in as its input and then it just constructs routes from that solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if I run this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It will convert that solution to REP routes from customers, I mean from factories to customers and how much to ship on each of those routes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The nice thing about this is that it gives us the same type of solution that we would get from the transportation problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: With the same cost as the trend shipment problem solution so, even though it seemed like it was lacking that structure it's possible to produce it and the cost is the same okay so both of those approaches.
MS Analytics Class 2021: would be able to solve the transportation problem, and when I say both of those approaches What do I mean.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if we have that data.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the data set is called to USA network.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Where we have all of our segments our origin destination and the mode of transportation and the unit shipping costs.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I could pre process that data and find the cheapest route from each factory to each customer kind of like Google maps would do right, except for using this as my input data.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And there are some network there's something called the network solver in pocket model that has built in routines that solve these graph problems like this problem is referred to as the shortest path or shortest route problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So I could take this as input data calculate the shortest route from every factory to every customer and use that as input for my transportation model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And that would give me the exact same minimum cost as solving the trend shipping problem and post processing the answer to get those routes, both of those approaches could be used to solve that same underlying problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Which is better they're about the same in terms of speed.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That to tell you which is better is kind of what more are you going to ask from the model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, like whenever you come up with a solution to a problem and take it to show to your manager or your superiors they say well that's great, but can it do this right, something that you didn't know that they wanted, but now they're telling you so what could possibly complicate those models.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, one complication that we sell them, we saw we saw when we saw the transportation model was some things were shipped from multiple factories to the same customer.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And, depending on what we're shipping that may or may not be a good idea, so let's say we want to modify the model to prevent shipments from more than one factory to any one customer.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We could modify the transportation model to do that without too much difficulty, but it would be almost impossible to modify the trend shipment, because the trend shipment model doesn't keep track of where things came from.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So that next step would say transportation model probably better there.
MS Analytics Class 2021: On the other hand, let's say we want to consider what happens if.
MS Analytics Class 2021: There is limited capacity on some of the some of the some of the routes or there is a snowstorm that closes off some of the routes in the network, the trans shipment model could easily adapt to that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Whereas the transportation model would be more difficult because the all we have is the distances and not not necessarily the routes and if we have to recalculate because of the disruption.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That might be possible changing the pre processing, but if there's a limited capacity and it's not zero they have to kind of share it that's going to be really tricky with the transportation model, but much more doable with the trend shipment model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so there is some flavor of networks in your project, but again like I said, take a look, look at the data, if you want, but next week i'll show you.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A model that you will be modified to solve the project, so you don't have the tools, yet, but you'll have them by next week.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay i'm going to stop there if anybody has any questions.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm happy to answer them.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But other than that we're done for the evening.
Karen Fireman: Thank you very much.